# Rationale for Group 2 Assignment 3
For this assignment, our group worked together to complete the five deliverables. Firstly, before starting to revise the diagrams, we read through the supporting documents of group five to get an overview of the system purposes and entities that are involved. Next, we reviewed the UML diagram and RDF diagram of group five to understand their interpretation of the scenario. Then, when revised the UML diagram, we decided to focus on modifying group five's work in a way that would best suit its implementation in Datalog programming. According to the professor's assignment instructions, we made changes on the UML diagram based on our understanding, and we added necessary entity classes and corresponding relationships to better reflect the inferences mentioned in the instruction. Finally, we restructured the RDF diagram based on the revised UML diagram and wrote the Datalog code to test our assumptions on the inferences until we got satisfying results. 
***
### Diagrams: Focus on certain classes
We had some discussions when revising the UML diagram of group five. The first step we took in this approach was to narrow down the scope of our analysis only on the entities related to the process of giving an award. Therefore, we diminished the importance of certain entity classes like Guideline, Admin Office and PRD that are about processing documents after awarding and assessing its validity. When we referred back to the document, we concluded that the part that is most relevant to our assignment is the university officials (in this case, The Provost and The Dean) who approve the award application filed by a department, then award the student of the department which completes the loop. Moreover, since our assignment is about adding necessary entities and relationships in determining if an award is category two, we decided to redesign the entity classes 'Award' and 'Official', elaborating them.
### Diagrams: Amount and Funder as entity classes
Another important aspect we covered was making Amount and Funder as separate entity classes, as this would help us deal with implementing them in the code. According to the assignment instruction, there are three measurements that work together to determine whether an award is category two or not: the amount, the funder and the person who approves it. If the award amount is between $50 to $500, it has to be approved by both the dean and the provost and be self-supporting in order to become a category two award. If the award amount is lower than $50, it only needs to be approved by the dean and be self-supporting. Therefore, we believed that these three measurements should be entity classes instead of attributes of the Award class in order to be reflected in our Datalog code. 
***
### Datalog: writing rules of inference
<p> After revising the diagrams and finishing drawing the new ones, writing the first two parts of the Datalog code: instance graph assertions and domains, co-domains and inverse relationships, went very smoothly for our group. The only thing we had to pay attention was the syntax and avoid typos. However, it took us a lot longer to finish the third part: rules of inference. Identifying the three measurements that determine if an award is category two was extremely helpful, since they form the inference logic of the statement together. </p>
<p> Initially, we were planning to use a condition as the amount being exactly equal to $100 as the question says that everything mentioned about this award must be taken into consideration. But we then noticed in the instructions that the rules need to be general enough, in our case to accommodate similar awards and made the condition greater than $50 instead of equal to $100. </p>
<p>We thus created three functions: gt50, st500, and st50, which means: greater than $50, smaller than $500 and smaller than $ 50. We then used these functions to filter awards and see if they fulfill the given criteria. Next, we addressed the condition that irrespective of the amount of the award, it needs to be self-supporting to belong to category two. We wrote isSelfSupporting to find out if the award fulfills this requirement. Finally, we wrote provostApprove and deanApprove to know who approves the award. </p>
<p>Since there are two conditions for an award to be in category two, we wrote two functions (is_category2_gt50 and is_category2_st50) for each condition. After finishing writing the functions stated above, putting them together was not very challenging. Since all of the three measurements are necessary for the deduction, we put relevant functions on the right side and connected with commas to show they have a relationship of "and".</p>
***
### Datalog: creating a new award
In the scenario provided by Professor Dubin, the Kentucky best engineer award (KBEA) is an award that falls under the category of more than $50 amount, and we can use it to test is_category2_gt50 function. To test the other function (is_category2_st50), we created another award named "small prize". It is an award with the amount of $10, self-supporting and approved only by the dean. The small prize fulfills the requirements of a category two award that has an amount of lower than $50, and the console should successfully compute the tuple (and it does).
***
### Group work
Overall as a group, we firstly brainstormed about how we could modify the previous work for this scenario. We discussed as what structure would be more appropriate for the given scenario and came up with conclusions that were agreed upon after convincing justifications by the proposer of the idea. We came up with the schema level instance diagram, then we split the coding into 3 parts where first part would contain domains, co-domains, and inverse relationships, the second part would be to code the Instance graph assertions and finally the Rules of Inference. This assignment gave us an opportunity to learn about the other group's use case and its deliverables, which has deepened our understanding of the concepts of inference based modeling. Moreover, writing the Datalog code was a challenging experience, but the process of solving the problems that we encountered was very rewarding and inspiring.
